# ArcaneBooks - PowerShell and the Advanced OpenLibrary ISBN API

## Introduction

This post continues my series on my ArcaneBooks project. For a background see my post [The ArcaneBooks Project - An Introduction](https://arcanecode.com/2023/03/13/the-arcanebooks-project-an-introduction/).

For this project I am using the [OpenLibrary.org](https://openlibrary.org) website, which provides two web APIs to access book data based on the ISBN. OpenLibrary is sponsored by the InternetArchive.

In a previous post, [ArcaneBooks – ISBN Overview, PowerShell, and the Simple OpenLibrary ISBN API](https://arcanecode.com/2023/03/20/arcanebooks-isbn-overview-powershell-and-the-simple-openlibrary-isbn-api/), I covered the use of the first API which I nicknamed the _Simple_ API as it is a bit easier to use and dissect the results. I also provided a background on what the ISBN is and how it is formed.

In this post I'll dive into the more complex of the APIs, what I call the _Advance_ API.

> Be aware the use of _Simple_ and _Advance_ are my terms, so I can easily distinguish between the two. They are not terms used by the OpenLibrary.

## The Advanced OpenLibrary API

The format of the Advanced API is slightly different from the simple. Here is template.

```
https://openlibrary.org/api/books?bibkeys=ISBN:[ISBN Goes Here]&jscmd=data&format=json"
```

You will replace the `[ISBN Goes Here]` text with the ISBN number you want to look up. Be aware this can only be digits, you must remove any spaces, dashes, or other characters.

Let's look at a code example of calling the API and getting all its properties.

## Calling The API with PowerShell

First, set an ISBN to lookup. We'll include some dashes for the demo. The title of the book is "Your HF Digital Companion"

```powershell
$ISBN = '0-87259-481-5'
```

Now remove any spaces or dashes, then create the URL.

```powershell
$isbnFormatted = $ISBN.Replace('-', '').Replace(' ', '')
$baseURL = "https://openlibrary.org/api/books?bibkeys=ISBN:"
$urlParams = "&jscmd=data&format=json"
$url = "$($baseURL)$($isbnFormatted)$($urlParams)"
```

Now let's call the URL and put the data into a variable.

```powershell
$bookData = Invoke-RestMethod $url
```

If we look at the data held by the variable, we get back a single column. That column holds JSON formatted data. (Note I truncated the XML for readability purposes.)

```powershell
$bookData
```

This is the output of displaying the variable.

```powershell
ISBN:0872594815
---------------
@{url=https://openlibrary.org/books/OL894295M/Your_HF_digital_companion; key=/books/OL894295M; title=Your HF digital companion; authors=System.Object[]; number_of_pages=197; …
```

We could address the data like:

```powershell
$bookData.'ISBN:0872594815'.Title
```

Note we had to wrap the ISBN number in quotes since a colon : isn't an allowed in property names. However, when we make the call the ISBN isn't set in stone.

But we do have it in a variable, and we can use string interpolation to format the property.

```powershell
$bookData."ISBN:$isbnformatted".title
```

This returns "Your HF digital companion". And yes, the words "digital" and "companion" should normally be capitalized, but this is the way the title comes from OpenLibrary.

Now that we have the formatting for the property name down, we can get the other properties. Note that not all properties that are returned will have data.

```powershell
$ISBN10 = $bookData."ISBN:$isbnformatted".identifiers.isbn_10
$ISBN13 = $bookData."ISBN:$isbnformatted".identifiers.isbn_13
$Title = $bookData."ISBN:$isbnformatted".title
$LCCN = $bookData."ISBN:$isbnformatted".identifiers.lccn
$NumberOfPages = $bookData."ISBN:$isbnformatted".number_of_pages
$PublishDate = $bookData."ISBN:$isbnformatted".publish_date
$LibraryOfCongressClassification = $bookData."ISBN:$isbnformatted".classifications.lc_classifications
$DeweyDecimalClass = $bookData."ISBN:$isbnformatted".classifications.dewey_decimal_class
$Notes = $bookData."ISBN:$isbnformatted".notes
$CoverUrlSmall = $bookData."ISBN:$isbnformatted".cover.small
$CoverUrlMedium = $bookData."ISBN:$isbnformatted".cover.medium
$CoverUrlLarge = $bookData."ISBN:$isbnformatted".cover.large
```

The ByStatement sometimes begins with the word "By ". If so we want to remove it. However if we try and do a replace and the by_statement column is null, attempting to call the Replace method will result in an error. So first we have to check for null, and only if the by_statement isn't null do we attempt to do a replace.

```powershell
if ($null -eq $bookData."ISBN:$isbnformatted".by_statement)
  { $ByStatement = '' }
else
  { $ByStatement = $bookData."ISBN:$isbnformatted".by_statement.Replace('by ', '') }
```

For the remaining data, each item can have multiple entries attached. For example, a book could have multiple authors. For our purposes we will just combine into a single entry.

We'll create a new variable of type **StringBuilder**, then loop over the list of items in the JSON, combining them into a single string.

In the `if`, we check to see if the string already has data, if so we append a comma before adding the second (or more) authors name.

Finally we use the ToString method of the **StringBuilder** class to convert the value back into a standard **string** data type.

Books can have multiple authors, as stated each is returned in its own item in an array. This code will combine them into a single string.

Note that when we call the **Append** method of the StringBuilder class, we need to prepend it with `[void]`, otherwise it will send output to the console which we don't want.

```powershell
$authors = [System.Text.StringBuilder]::new()
foreach ($a in $bookData."ISBN:$isbnformatted".authors)
{
  if ($authors.Length -gt 1)
    { [void]$authors.Append(", $($a.name)") }
  else
    { [void]$authors.Append($a.name) }
}
$Author = $authors.ToString()
```

Subjects can be an array, let's combine them into a single string.

```powershell
$subjects = [System.Text.StringBuilder]::new()
foreach ($s in $bookData."ISBN:$isbnformatted".subjects)
{
  if ($subjects.Length -gt 1)
    { [void]$subjects.Append(", $($s.name)") }
  else
    { [void]$subjects.Append($s.name) }
}
$Subject = $subjects.ToString()
```

A book could have multiple publishers over time. The author could shift to a new publisher, or more likely a publishing house could be purchases and the new owners name used. The data is returned as an array, so combine them as we did with authors and subjects.

```powershell
$thePublishers = [System.Text.StringBuilder]::new()
foreach ($p in $bookData."ISBN:$isbnformatted".publishers)
{
  if ($thePublishers.Length -gt 1)
    { [void]$thePublishers.Append(", $($p.name)") }
  else
    { [void]$thePublishers.Append($p.name) }
}
$Publishers = $thePublishers.ToString()
```

Since there could be multiple publishers, logically there could be multiple publishing locations. This will combine them into a single string.

```powershell
$locations = [System.Text.StringBuilder]::new()
foreach ($l in $bookData."ISBN:$isbnformatted".publish_places)
{
  if ($locations.Length -gt 1)
    { [void]$locations.Append(", $($l.name)") }
  else
    { [void]$locations.Append($l.name) }
}
$PublisherLocation = $locations.ToString()
```

Now print out all the returned data.

```powershell
$ISBN10
$ISBN13
$Title
$LCCN
$NumberOfPages
$PublishDate
$LibraryOfCongressClassification
$DeweyDecimalClass
$Notes
$CoverUrlSmall
$CoverUrlMedium
$CoverUrlLarge
$ByStatement
$Author
$Subject
$Publishers
$PublisherLocation
```

## The Output

Here is the output, I put it into a table for easier reading.

| Item | Value |
|------:|-------|
ISBN10 | 95185134
ISBN13 | [Missing Value]
Title | Your HF digital companion
LCCN | [Missing Value]
Number of Pages | 197
Publish Date | 1995
LibraryOfCongressClassification | TK5745 .F572 1995
DeweyDecimalClass | 004.6/4
Notes | Includes bibliographical references.
Based on | Your RTTY/AMTOR companion. 1st ed. c1993.
CoverUrlSmall | https://covers.openlibrary.org/b/id/12774631-S.jpg
CoverUrlMedium | https://covers.openlibrary.org/b/id/12774631-M.jpg
CoverUrlLarge | https://covers.openlibrary.org/b/id/12774631-L.jpg
ByStatement | Steve Ford.
Author | Steve Ford
Subject | Radiotelegraph, Amateurs' manuals
Publishers | American Radio Relay League
PublisherLocation | Newington, CT

## See Also

The following operators and functions were used or mentioned in this article's demos. You can learn more about them in some of my previous posts, linked below.

[Fun With PowerShell Logic Branching](https://arcanecode.com/2021/08/09/fun-with-powershell-logic-branching/)

[Fun With PowerShell Loops](https://arcanecode.com/2021/08/23/fun-with-powershell-loops/)

[Fun With PowerShell Strings](https://arcanecode.com/2021/07/12/fun-with-powershell-strings/)

[Fun With PowerShell String Formatting](https://arcanecode.com/2021/07/19/fun-with-powershell-string-formatting/)

## Conclusion

In this post we saw how to use what I call the _advanced_ API offered by OpenLibrary to retrieve book data based on the ISBN.

In the next post we'll see how to get book data based on the Library Of Congress Catalog Number, using PowerShell and the Library of Congresses web API.

The demos in this series of blog posts was inspired by my Pluralsight course [PowerShell 7 Quick Start for Developers on Linux, macOS and Windows](https://pluralsight.pxf.io/jWzbre), one of many PowerShell courses I have on Pluralsight. All of my courses are linked on my [About Me](https://arcanecode.com/info/) page.

If you don't have a Pluralsight subscription, just go to [my list of courses on Pluralsight](https://pluralsight.pxf.io/kjz6jn) . At the top is a Try For Free button you can use to get a free 10 day subscription to Pluralsight, with which you can watch my courses, or any other course on the site.

Post Link: [ArcaneBooks - PowerShell and the Advanced OpenLibrary ISBN API](https://arcanecode.com/2023/04/03/arcanebooks-powershell-and-the-advanced-openlibrary-isbn-api/)
